---
layout: subpage
title: "Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty"
source: D. Acemoglu, J. Robinson
tags: [economics, history, politics]
---
**Table of Contents**
- [Chapter 1: So Close And Yet So Different](#chapter-1)
- [Chapter 2: Theories That Don't Work](#chapter-2)
- [Chapter 3: The Making Of Prosperity And Poverty](#chapter-3)

## Chapter 1
- Nogales, Arizona and Nogales, Sonora are two agglomerated cities in the United States and Mexico respectively. Despite similarities in geography and ethnicity, the residents of both cities live vastly different lives. Nogales, Arizona enjoys a much higher standard of living, higher average income, and a fairer political system. With this example, the authors introduce the idea that **institutions are the main reason behind differences in economic prosperity around the world**.
- When the Spanish colonized Latin America, they obtained gold and silver through brutal exploitation. This included plundering the riches of the Aztec and Inca empires, relocating and enslaving the indigenous population, as well as pricing and taxation laws that aimed to reduce wages and redirect local wealth into the hands of the Spanish elite.
- At first, the English tried to adopt the Spanish model when colonizing North America, which ended in failure. This was because the indigenous population density of North America was far lower than that of Central and South America, and there were simply no precious metals in the region to mine or plunder. The only viable alternative was to offer incentives for colonists to settle and invest in the growing colonies. English elites initially tried to restrict the economic and political rights of people living in colonies in a way similar to that of the Spanish. This did not work as there were many options for settlers in the New World; they could not be forced into a rigid hierarchical society. This led to the development of self-governance through assemblies of male property holders in each of the Thirteen Colonies, a prelude to the democratic system and constitutional principles that would define the United States.
- There were major differences between the constitutional process during the independence of the US and Latin America countries. Mexican independence came with rule under dictatorships, their sole purpose of governance being to maintain the set of economic institutions formed during the colonial period. The Constitution of the US was defined through a series of compromises between congressional representatives, which helped keep the Union stable up until the Civil War. Mexico, on the other hand, was highly unstable, which led to insecure property rights and the weakening of state power.
- Patents, a form of property rights, were key to US success and innovation during the Industrial Revolution (Edison being a prime example). Moreover, the expansion of financial intermediation and banking facilitated growth of businesses and industries, with intense competition driving down interest rates for capital. To contrast this, Mexico had a uncompetitive banking industry which led to high interest rates. The reason behind state banking monopolies was to serve the interests of the powerful and wealthy, as they could be used to give out monetary favors. On the other hand, corruption in the US was much less rampant due to election terms and a broad distribution of political rights.
- Even under the expansion of international trade and globalization, Latin American countries could not uproot their economic institutions from the colonial era, as politicians only found ways to adopt new institutions that were just as unequal and exploitative.
- Bill Gates rose to mega-billionaire status through technological innovation. Carlos Slim became rich through acquiring Telmex, the Mexican telecommunications monopoly that was privatized in 1990. Slim was able to maintain Telmex's monopoly through legal loopholes and his political connections.
- Institutions influence incentives and behavior. While economic institutions are important to determine whether a country is poor or rich, **political institutions are the drivers behind the creation and maintenance of economic institutions**, and it is their interactions that truly shape the success and failure of nations.

## Chapter 2
- There seems to be a persistent geographical divide between rich and poor countries for the last 150 years. For example, the African continent and the Middle Eastern region seems to contain many low per-capita GDP nations, while North America, Western Europe and Australasia have persistently ranked in the richest countries during modern history. However, the authors claim that such distributions are not immutable.
- The first popular theory for world inequality that the authors refute is the **geography hypothesis**. Many poor countries are concentrated between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, so naturally there have been hypotheses that poverty in those regions were at least partially caused by their geographical location. Jeffrey Sachs argues that climate, tropical diseases and soil quality adversely affect the economic development in tropic and semi-tropical regions.
- The authors rebut the geography hypothesis through several key points. First, there are many modern counter-examples, including countries in those regions that have prospered (Singapore, Malaysia, Botswana), as well as the economic divergence between split nations (North vs South Korea, East vs West Germany). Moreover, throughout history, there were periods when countries in the tropic region were richer than their more temperate counterparts (the Aztecs and Incas vs Native Americans, pre-colonial India vs pre-colonial Australasia). The reversal of fortunes happened after these regions became colonized.
- While tropical diseases like malaria have been destructive in Africa, the authors argue that rampant diseases are not the inherent cause of poverty, but rather a consequence of it due to ineffective public health measures. 19th-century England also had poor public health, but the government invested in clean water and proper sewage treatment, measures that were made possible through previous political and economic successes.
